version 11.03 (2011-3-14)
Added NAG nagfor support.
Added Multiple languages support.
Updated lapack version to 3.2.2. Some files are removed and new files are added.
Disabled Y transformation for GCM.
Modified timing of identification of number of used variables in the forecast file.
Fixed some errors identifying and replacing missing values in the forecast file.
Fixed some problems saving regression output files.
Fixed problem with initial limits on number of modes.
Replaced missing error message with warning message when output file already exists.
Removed redundant initialization.
Removed redundant lwait from error routine.
Confirmed changes to pointers in get_nongridded_info_v10
Fixed problem with array bounds in forecast.
Fixed problem with constant grid screen output.
Fixed occasional problems readig multi-field files.
Fixed problem with disassociated poniters when reading unreferenced files.
Simplified data precision setting. Updated some labels. Implemented additional translations.
Changed options numbers to avoid furture option numbers shortage and conflicts..
Fixed problem with rounding errors.
Renamed bkfield in get_area to avoid potential name conflict.
Corrected length of easternmost longitude label
Fixed problem reading south-to-north gridded files.
Corrected problem mapping longitudes less than -180.
Additional adjustments to avoid perfect canonical correlations Introduced conversions to and from cm/day.
Put update_pexc within ifm loop so ifm will be always initialized. That solved crashing problem within update_pexc.
Fixed CCA rounding problem, and improved efficiency.
Updated restrictions on maximum number of principal components.
Corrected missing lcw reference.
Further updates to maximum number of principal components, Set maximum number of PCs to MIN(nt-1,nv) instead of MIN(nt,nv), Parameterized number of principal component calculation options

Version 11.01 (2010-12-21)
Added ifort and pfg90 support
Added "Raw GCM Model Output" main menu option
Added GCM algorithm option selections
Added Goodness index option selections
Fixed problems reading unstacked gridded files.
Fixed problem reassigning field information after failed file opening.
Implemented option to compare station or gridded data with interpolated or
nearest GCM gridboxes, with various options for bias and skill corrections.
Implemented option to choose correlation coefficient for calculating
goodness index.
Set default coorelation coefficient for goodness index to Kendall's.
Implemented option to calculate probabilistic verification scores for
pooled retroactive forecasts.
Added options to save 2AFC skill maps for continuous and categorical forecasts.
Permitted different missing value flags for different fields.
Permitted missing years or days in input files except for year/day 2.
Made cpt:T tag line in version 10 input files redundant. This line is no longer needed, or is ignored if present.
Modified default estimate of "Start at" dates to avoid occasional invalid settings.
Improved error messaging for input file format problems.
Simplified error message handling.
Simplified some file output routines.
Fixed some problems estimating missing values in forecast files.
Fixed problem reading data in non-default forecast files.
Fixed some occasional problems saving regression coefficients.
Created array of attributes diagrams to simplify programming.
Generalized probabilistic score routines to allow probabilities to sum to 1 or to 100.
Simplified data input routines.
New get_structure algorithms to implement more rigorous testing, and to
facilitate greater flexibility on input formats.
Renamed function erfc to avoid conflict with Fortran extensions in some
compilers.
Deleted some redundant INTRINSIC statements.

version 10.09 (2010-08-19)

Fixed problem reading multiple month gridded files.
Corrected valid longitude checks.
Permitted different domains for different fields.
Permitted maps wider than 360 degrees.
Changed 'Number of EOF extensions' to 'Number of additional months/days'
Prevented occasional problem when first year of data has too many missing
values.
Prevented occasional problem with climatological period when first year of
data is omitted.
Fixed occasional problem setting season when months are undefined.
Fixed occasional problem locating stations incorrectly.
Fixed problem reading multi-month station files.
Fixed occasional problem printing saving regression coefficients.
Reorganized file structure checking algorithm.
Renamed some variables.
Deleted unused variable.

version 10.08 is skipped on purpose

version 10.07

Fixed problems with forecast start dates
Fixed problems with dates in predictor scores output file.
Corrected problem with forecasts when standardization option is reset after
model calculated.
Corrected problem with tailoring options which were not set correctly.
Changed EOF temporal scores output files tag so that the files can be read
by CPT as unreferenced files.

version 10.06

Applied missing restandardization to forecasts and prediction intervals.
Corrected occasional problem printing incorrect date on forecast output files.
Avoided occasional array size inconsistency when printing weather roulette results.
Fixed occasional problem sequencing daily data.
Ensured forecast probabilities update when climatological probabilities are adjusted.
Improved default first date from which to forecast, and number of forecasts.
Implemented pull down menus for month prompts for daily data.
Added latitude and longitude prompts for gridded data on bootstrap window.
Default climatological period set before analysis is run when user attempts to set the climatological period.
Introduced day and month prompts for climatological period for daily data.
Resolved problem displaying results for final gridpoint.
Fixed unequal spacing on map colourbars.
Increased maximum length of cpt:T line to 2**24.
Permitted missing '/' at end of XML URLs.
Corrected error message when boundariesw and lakes files are missing.
Corrected some spelling mistakes in error messages.
Renamed get_thresholds subroutine for consistency with menu.


version 10.05

Corrected progress meter when retroactive option is used with analogue years.
Corrected some problems with some of the example data files.


version 10.04

Permitted option to include irregularly lagged EOF extensions.
Added lakes to maps.
Added option to mask shading over lakes.
Added option to mask shading over land.
Improved error messages for input file formatting problems.
Fixed occasional problem reading files with a single case.
Fixed occasional problems reading gridded forecast files.
Fixed problem calculating forecasts when number of forecasts is more than length of training period.
Fixed occasional problem resetting climatological period.
Prevented access of verification results when cross-validation is run after retroactive analysis.
Minor improvements to progress meter, including prevention of premature termination.
Corrected occasional problem saving regression coefficients because of unset flag.
COrrected occasional problem printing longitude markings on maps.
Corrected occasional problems initializing fields.
Fixed problems saving ensemble forecasts.
Set default zero flag for multiple fields to be off.
Modified the default length of initial training period, to avoid problems with small datasets.
Minor improvements in spacing of labels on colour bar.
Improved compatibility with Windows 7.
Revised IF statement in write_grid to avoid logical error, but that would never occur in practice (resolved to avoid messages for some compilers).
Updated help pages.
Added Lulin Song as an author.


version 10.03

Added option to set category thresholds by analogues years.
Added option to calculate and save p-values for skill maps.
Gridded results prompted by latitude and longitude rather than grid number.
Fixed occasional truncation of grid and station coordinates.
Corrected some problems formatting bootstrap results.
Corrected problem showing some retroactive skill maps.
Corrected problem saving upper and lower prediction interval maps.
Improved contouring.
Insured consistency of colour scale.
Insured shading of last grid square if used.
Permitted reversal of colour scale on forecast values maps.


version 10.02

Added option to view all CCA modes upto maximum number selected.
Replaced mean squared error with % variance on performance measures window, and reordered other scores.
Permitted near-360 degree maps when longitudes are realigned.
Improved tick mark interval on y-axis.
Improved appearance of logarithmic scree plots.
Resolved occasional problem typing initial length of training period for retroactive forecasts.
Prevented occasional fatal errors when entering out-of-range settings.
Corrected forecasts when tailoring options are reset.
Prevented viewing of verification results when tailoring options are reset.
Resolved problem viewing forecast ensembles.
Resolved occasional problem viewing probabilities of exceedance.
Resolved problem with 
Resolved occasional problem calculating forecasts.
Resolved occasional problem setting dates for version 9 input files.
Resolved some occasional problems reading multified / EOF extension gridded files.
Resolved some occasional problems reading short Z files.
Resolved problem resetting number of variables when domain setting change is cancelled.
Resolved possible problem drawing maps when last gridpoint is unused.
Resolved occasional problem calculating asolute thresholds on standardized data.
Resolved occasional problem reading structure of station and unreferenced files.
Implemented temporary fix for expressing forecast in anomalies.
Corrected occasional problem outputting data when some yeas are marked as missing.
Set correct user directories for Spanish and Portuguese versions of Windows.
Some improvements in ability to run on Windows Vista.
Deleted some redundant USE statements ad INTRINSIC declarations.


version 10.01

Permitted reading of multiple fields, and new CPT version 10 file formats.
Combined Input and Results windows, and windows for different analysis settings.
Added weather roulette options to retroactive verification.
Added option to view an ensemble of forecasts based on the assumed error distribution.
Added option to set climatological period after Y file is set and before running analysis.
Added odds to forecast series window.
Added option to show odds relative to climatology.
Added option to specify precision of forecasts.
Added option to omit cases when number of missing values is too high.
Adjusted CCA time series graph to plot X and Y against Y year so that graphs are superimposed when lag/=0.
Last year of data shown with file information.
Default length of training period set according to amount of available data.
Default number of forecasts set according to amount of available data.
Revised skill map colour spectrum.
Reduced graphic sizes slightly.
Corrected occasional problems drawing climatological curve on probability of exceedance graph when data are transformed.
Permitted climatological period of an outer category to exceed 0.5.
Climatological period printed under actions when calculating.
Prompt removed when invalid climatological period updated automatically.
Confidence intervals saved in single file.
Saved MLR coefficients based on centred rather than standardized data; regression constant also saved.
Improved output format for regression coefficients, forecast probabilities and confidence intervals.
Output files saved in CPT 10 format.
Accepted "STATIONS" as a valid keyword for version 9 station files.
Improved progress meter.
Disabled project save when no modification has been made.
Renamed 'Graphics' menu item to 'Modes'.
Renamed 'Thresholds' menu item to 'Tailoring'.
Renamed 'Data Output' menu item to 'Output Results'.
Moved forecast data output to Output Results menu.
Added options to save forecast and retroactive odds.
Parameterized the calculation of the ClearWin+ Window size.
Prevented fatal error when climatological period is invalid or too short.
X EOF calculation option restored after MLR.
Fixed problem with forecasts when resetting standardization option after model fit.
Prevented MLR calculation when gridded or station X file is opened prior to viewing MLR.
Improved data availability checks for retroactive calculations.
Prevented fatal error when degrees of freedom for Student's t-distribution are zero.
Prevented programme termination if CPT.ini file in user's directory is not found.
Prevented occasional fatal error when a principal component explains minimal variance during optimization.
Prevented some occasional fatal errors when using MLR with large numbers of predictors.
Error and warning indicators printed in bold.
Updated ifile derived type to include more extensive date information for improved lag checking.
Created CPT_Data static library to contain parameter settings.
Converted variable inclusion flags to indices for improved efficiency.
Modularized error, warning, and advisory notifications, and improved error diagnostics.
Improved efficiency of dataset structure identification for pre-v10 input files.
Improved memory handling for pointers.
Simplified checking for missing values.
Minor improvements in efficiency of construction of date strings for progress prompts.
Simplified calling of map-drawing routine.
Created help initialization subroutine.
Simplified handling of project files.
Deleted some redundant default and back-up variables.
Deleted some redundant USE statements.


version 9.11

Prevented occasional estimation of negative values when zero-bound option is set.
Resolved occasional problems clearing memory after unsuccessful forecast calculation.
Updated CPT homepage URL.


version 9.10

Added option to save prediction error variances.
Added option to accept approximate data limits as domain settings.
Fixed occasional problem saving incorrect latitudes and longitudes for some station data output files.
Remembered last initial length of training period for retroactive forecasts.
Set lower limit on initial length of training period for retroactive forecasts.
Modified gridded file date checking to permit greater flexibility.
Fixed occasional fatal error calculating variance ratio.
Parameterized some error messages.
Removed access to some redundant default variables.
Changed some conflicted accelerator keys.
Generalized construction of some graphics titles.
Deleted a redundant IF statement.


version 9.09

Fixed occasional problem resetting length of training period.
Updated ifile derived type to include month and day.


version 9.08

Fixed fatal problem plotting exceedance probability curves.
Fixed fatal problem plotting forecast values.
Fixed problems resetting graph titles.
Fixed occasional problem resetting length of training period.


version 9.07

Added options to save graphics as .BMP files.
Changed some accelerator keys.
Fixed occasional fatal problem calculating forecast probabilities.


version 9.06

Implemented 2AFC scores and variance ratio verification measures.


version 9.05

Simplified initialization of some graphics variables.
Eliminated some graphics variable-naming conflicts.
Supplied some missing IMPLICIT statements.
Deleted some redundant variables.
Deleted some redundant USE statements.


version 9.04

Resolved occasional problem allocating memory for forecasts.
Resolved some problems with the cursor after certain error messages.
Simplified checking of need for forecast calculation.
Modularized standardization options.
Alleviated problem with hanging cursor on probability of exceendance windows.
X and Y output files reset.
Moved missing value replacement routines from data_input to statistics module.
Missing value replacement performed after both datasets read.
Simplified prompting for changed project file.
Renamed some functions and subroutines for greater clarity and consistency.
Simplified checks for stopped forecast calculations.
Moved a calculation flag to analysis module.
Removed some redundant variables.
Removed some redundant and supplied some missing USE statements.
Removed some redundant and supplied some missing INTRINSIC declarations.


version 9.03

Resolved problem allocating memory resulting from ALLOCATE bug in new compiler.
Added hour-glass cursor when reading project file.
Major restructuring of analysis, cca, and mlr modules to facilitate implementation of DLL structure.
Minor restructuring of statistics module to facilitate implementation of DLL structure.
Simplified checking of program settings.
Combined PCR and MLR modules.
Simplified control of title and input windows.
Simplified forcing of minimum training period length, and of odd cross-validation window length.
Minor improvement to standardization procedure.
Correction to occasional problem with station longitudes.
Corrected identification of daily data starting on the last day of the month.
Simplified code for determining order of magnitude.
Created separate routines for standardization and unstandardization to avoid potential confusion.
Editted some ungrammatical messages.
Derived type INTENT(OUT) changed to INTENT(INOUT) when not all items are set.
Minor revisions to memory management.
Added some missing PUBLIC declarations.
Added some missing INTRINSIC declarations.
Removed some redundant variables.
Removed some redundant USE statements.
Removed some redundant and supplied some missing INTRINSIC declarations.


version 9.02

EOF loadings shown in maps and output adjusted for latitude weights.
Fixed problem introduced in version 9.01 with overwrite prompt.
Simplified CCA and PCR code.
Implemented LAPACK 3.1.1.
Reduced memory requirements.


version 9.01

Divided data_io module into input and output.
LAPACK routines included as DLL.
Simplified analysis and graphics module to facilitate implementation of DLL structure.
Minor improvements in efficiency of plotting of probability of exceedance curves.
Replaced overwrite function with print_qwarning.
Moved make_coor function to graphics module.
Renamed some functions and subroutines for greater consistency.
Removed some redundant USE statements.


version 8.08

Permitted reading of continuous daily data.
Adjusted correlation algorithm to give more accurate results when variances are very different.
Implemented missing year checks for unreferenced data.
Fixed an occasional problem reading station data from forecast file.
Made month format in gridded files case insensitive.
Renamed some variables.
Removed some redundant USE statements.


version 8.07

Fixed occasional fatal error drawing colour bar.
Updated help pages.


version 8.06

Disabled gridded and station X input files for MLR.
Removed low resolution map option.


version 8.05

Implemented multiple linear regression (MLR).
Parameterized analysis names.
Corrected occasional error in indicating project file directory.
Removed some redundant USE statements.


version 8.04

Implemented option to plot cumulative % of variance on scree plots.
Improved error message on failed opening of CPT.ini.
Simplified checking of invalid lags.
Introduced IRI logo on title page.
Parameterized copyright dates.
Parameterized font type.
Alternative font used if default fonts unavailable.


version 8.03

Added option to save retroactive forecast probabilities and upper and lower retroactive prediction limits.
Thresholds and standardization options can be set from input window.
Added category shading to exceedance probability curves.
Activated exceedance probability curves for all options.
Input Y data saved standardized according to standardization option.
Corrected forecasts for when transformation flag is on.
Corrected identification of retroactive and forecast categories.
Fixed fatal error when saving forecast probabilities if output file is not formatted.
Changed some 'reliability diagram' labels to 'attributes diagram'.
Upper and lower prediction limits saved as %s if anomalies are defined as %s.
Simplified standardization implementation.
Prevented attempts to save data after failed file opening for some output file types.
Minor improvements to progress meter.
Simplified definitions of retroactive period.
Added number to output file derived type to simplify file identification.
Added some missing INTRINSIC statements.
Updated help pages.


version 8.02

Corrected plotting of frequency histograms on attributes diagrams.
Corrected retroactive forecast probabilitiy calculation when transformation option is on.
Improved label positioning on retroactive ROC verification graph when skill is negative.
Added ROC areas to ROC graph labels.
No skill line on attributes diagram changed to dash-dotted.
Minor improvements to black and white graphics.
Prevented spurious prompt to save project file changes after file is closed by switching analyses via View menu item.
Supplied some missing INTENT statements.
Simplified some subroutine calls.


version 8.01

Retroactive forecast probabilities calculated.
Implemented attributes and ROC diagrams for retroactive forecasts for all points.
Simplified unformatted output of ROC diagrams.
Corrected resetting of ROC output file name.
Corrected occasional failure to recalculate forecasts when first year from which to forecast is reset.
Corrected minor inaccuracies in calculating retroactive forecasts when latitude weighting is applied.
Corrected calculation of retroactive forecast categories.
Retroactive forecast update interval remembered.
Revised calculation of probability of exceedance curves.
Implemented additional checks to avoid overflow errors.
Modified output format of ROC results.
Substantial reorganization of modules.
Major restructuring of cca and pcr modules to improve efficiency given new retroactive probability forecasts.
Improved memory handling.
Deleted some redundant USE and INTRINSIC statements.


version 7.06

Added colour indicator to Y-axis of CCA time scores graphs.
Corrected colour indicators on validation graphs for black and white option.
Fixed occasional problem saving unreferenced output files.
Error message issued if a file with its name containing the % character is opened.
Prevented occasional fatal error resulting from floating errors in calculating the variance of the last EOF.
Corrected default CCA map and graph titles.
Modified PUBLIC/PRIVATE attributes of some graphics parameters.
Supplied some missing INTRINSIC statements.


version 7.05

Fixed problem introduced in version 7.01 updating forecast probabilities when thresholds are changed.
Corrected problem saving regression coefficients for unreferenced data.
Only the optimal number of CCA modes saved in output file to avoid occasional fatal error when saving.


version 7.04

Maximum number of EOFs saved in output files rather than optimum number.
Principal component scores plotted with correct variance.
Principal component scores calculated with PCR saved with variances equal to corresponding eigenvalues.
Implemented option to save hit and false-alaram rates from ROC graph.
Switched off hour-glass cursor after incorrect initial retroactive training period is specified.
Fixed fatal problem calculating latitude weights when latitudes are inverted.
Improved latitude weighting scheme for domain boundaries.
Improved handling of zero-bound.
Fixed occasional fatal problem when saving predictor time scores for forecasts.
Fixed problem calculating forecasts using PCR with Y transformation option switched on.
File initializations moved to iofiles module.
Deleted some redundant USE statements.


version 7.03

Fixed problem with latitude weighting when only two lines of latitude are used.
Improved forecast probability estimates when transform Y data option is activated.
Fixed occasional problem reading forecast file after unsuccessful forecast file change.
Previous forecast file restored after unsiccessful opening of new file.


version 7.02

Fixed problem running PCR with transform Y data option activated.


version 7.01

Added option to set a zero-bound.
Added option to transform forecasts to % of average.
Reactivated option to transform Y data to normal.
Added option to set model update interval during retroactive forecasting.
Disabled probability of exceedance plots if normalization and/or zero-bound option is activated.
Major improvements in efficiency when optimizing numbers of modes.
Goodness index indicated even without optimization.
Output files saved as tab-delimited.
Can view all principal components, not just those used.
All principal component scores plotted and saved with variances equal to corresponding eigenvalues.
Cosine latitude weighting applied to gridded data when calculating principal components.
Simplified calling of CCA and PCR routines.
Reduced memory requirement for calculating goodness index.
Updated help pages.


version 6.10

Ensured that forecasts are recalculated if thresholds are updated but a new forecast window is not opened.
Occasional improvements in efficiency of calculation of forecasts.
Deleted some unused variables.
Removed an unused grey menu item flag.


version 6.09

Parameterized length of station names and months for improved compatability with source code version. 
Parameterized output formats for improved flexibiliity.
Parameterized length of month strings.
Restructured routines for output of some output formats.
Minor improvements in efficiency of output to some files.
Fixed some occasional output problems.
Improved data structure checking for gridded data files.
Moved get_structure to an internal procedure of get_ifile.
Changed some index names for greater consistency.


version 6.08

Fixed problem opening gridded files introduced in version 6.07.


version 6.07

Fixed problem saving cross-validated scatter diagram.
Changed default first year to be same as first year of opened file.
Corrected problem using "LON" keyword.
Fixed spurious memory allocation error message issued when forecast file is changed.
Adjusted default error bar for predictions to 68.3%.
Changed default maximum number of Y EOF modes.
Improved file format checks for gridded data.
Implemented improved KIND selection for REAL constants.
Supplied some missing intrinsic statements.


version 6.06

Fixed occasional problem with adjustments to thresholds when climatological period is reset. 
Resolved problems with saving graphics in Output subdirectory.
Read input file error messages changed to indicate number of years in training period read successfully.
Changed years in copyright statement on start-up window.
Editorial corrections made to Help About window.
Principal component scores plotted and saved with variances equal to corresponding eigenvalues (corrected from 6.05).
Resolved problems plotting bar charts of EOF loadings for unreferenced data.
Corrected warning when problem saving PC regression file using gridded data.
Converted numbers of X and Y variables to targets to avoid compilation problems with some compilers.
Replaced some MATMUL calls for compatibility with source code version, which was experiencing large rounding errors with some compilers.


version 6.05

Principal component scores plotted with variances equal to corresponding eigenvalues.
Added option to save predictor EOF time scores for forecast data.
Fixed problems using anomalies and standardized anomalies.
Moved standardization options to Threshold Settings.
Added standardization option to graphics titles.
Increased maximum size of graphics titles, and decreased font size.
Fixed problem with absolute thresholds radio button.
Fixed occasional problem with first year of training period introduced at version 6.04.
Minor modifications to estimation of percentiles when thresholds are beyond range of data.
Fixed occasional problem identifying whether to optimise number of modes when running CCA.
Improved structure and efficiency of data checks.
Improved structure and efficiency of domain checks.
Deleted some redundant USE variables.


version 6.04

Corrected X input file label on Y input section.
Forced immediate update to prediction interval length when reset.
Changed number of grids / stations / series to zero when no input file is open.
Simplified functions for setting output files and file formats.
Simplified subroutine call for reading station data.
Removed redundant Help menu items from Output File Definitions window.
Changed some function and derived type names.


version 6.03

Implemented option to plot exceedance probability graphs.
Implemented option to print and save forecast values as anomalies or standardized anomalies.
Major redesign of graphics code.
Modifications made to normalization procedure.
Improved traps to prevent occasional fatal errors when windows are closed prematurely.
Added climatological period to forecast series window.
Corrected climatological period indication on forecast probabilities window.
Updated help pages.
Temporarily disabled Y data transformation option.
Updated IRI name.
Changed function names in forecast module for clearer structure.


version 6.02

Number of latitudes and longitudes / stations / series detected automatically.
Line-wrapping no longer permitted in input files.
Maximum input file line length of 1048576 characters.
Increased maximum width of output files in Windows version of CPT.
Updated help pages.


version 6.01

Seperate initialization files and directories for multi-users.


version 5.07

Implemented options for defining forecast error-variance.
Prediction confidence level saved in Project file.
Allowed for asymmetric climatological probabilities.
Allowed for some output files of wider than 1636 longitudes/stations/series.
Minor changes in format of some output files.
Correced problem calculating Gerrity coefficients when a category has no cases.
Modified procedure for estimation of quantiles beyond data bounds.
Resolved some problems setting the bootstrap confidence level.
Resolved some problems setting the default bootstrap confidence level and prediction confidence level.
Added project name to Results Window.
Removed project name from forecast output file prompt.
Simplified checks for changed project file settings.
Simplified various program option prompts.
Fixed problem resetting default forecast confidence level.
Supplied a missing accelerator key on title screen.
Simplified continency table memory allocation.
Resolved some occasional problems opening forecast files, after an attempt to open an invalid forecast file.
Implemented some missing error traps for memory allocation problems.
Implemented some improvements in efficiency of array handling.
Minor improvements in memory management for bootstrapping.
Simplified progress meter for improved compatability with source code version of CPT.
Improved memory management when results window is closed when program is calculating.
Created categories module.
Modularized input screens.
Modularized forcing of odd length and default length of cross-validation windows.
Modularized calculation of scores.
Simplified data precision definitions.
Removed some redundant USE statements.
Removed some redundant INTRINSIC statements.


version 5.06

Correct keywords saved in unreferenced input files.


version 5.05

Fixed occasional problems identifying stations within specified domain when domain crosses the dateline.
Minor improvements in efficiency in reading station data.
"LON" keyword permitted for "LONGITUDE" or "LONG".
File structure identified automatically.
Fixed fatal error calculating goodness index when any of the cross-validated correlations are +/-1.0.
Numbers of EOF/CCA modes replaced with minimum numbers.
Calculations always halted if there are problems with numbers of EOF/CCA modes prior to reading data.
Corrected problem setting default numbers of Y EOF modes.
Minor corrections made to calculations of forecast probabilities and prediction intervals.
Changed accelerator keys for retroactive scatter plots.
Resolved fatal error calculating retroactive performance measures.
Deleted some unused variables.
Updated help pages describing calculation of the goodness index.


version 5.04

Implemented Gerrity score.
Prevented occasional skipping of series when scrolling in bootstrap window.


version 5.03

Removed variance-adjusted contingency tables, and variance-adjusted hit and hit skill scores.
Corrected problems with categorical scores for transformed data.
Implemented LEPS score.
Included space for Gerrity score to be implemented at a later version.
Changed format of grid reference / station / variable names on results windows to prevent update when new window is opened.
Changed column totals for contingency table to indicate percentages of times each of the three categories are forecasted.
Changed format of performance measures window to freeze output when another performance measures window is opened.
Changed format of contingency tables window to freeze output when another contingency tables window is opened.
Replaced forecast thresholds with climatological probabilities on forecast series window.
Added confidence level for prediction intervals to forecast values maps.
Added climatological period to forecast values and probabilities windows.
Resolved conflict between open forecast values and forecast probabilities windows.
Prevented overwriting of backup absolute thresholds.
Corrected scaling of indicated bootstrap confidence level.
Minor changes in some scree plots.
Corrected upper limit to climatological probability of above-/below-normal.
Corrected problem with reversed thresholds when climatological probability of above-/below-normal is extremely low.
Corrected category shading when thresholds are beyond the y-axis range.
Improved criteria for y-axis rescaling.
Some smoothing of advance of progress bar.
Restructuring of validation procedures to improve efficiency and reduce executable size.
Major restructuring of modules and internally stored results.
Minor improvements in efficiency of cross-validation procedure.
Some functions renamed.


version 5.02

Implemented option to transform data to a normal distribution.
Implemented option to set prior probabilities of above/below, or to use absolute thresholds.
Climatological period, bootstrap settings, and transformation option saved in Project files.
Small changes in format of Forecast Series window to prevent update of thresholds in old windows.
Some early CPT version Project files no longer supported.
Some restructuring of modules for setting climatological period.
Deleted some redundant USE variables.
Updated help pages.


version 5.01

Implemented prediction intervals.
Added option to draw maps/bar charts of forecasted values with prediction limits.
Removed the forecast category on Forecast Series windows, and removed option to save the categories.
Grid spacing based on maximum rather than minimum map dimension.
Variable names included on forecast map windows for unreferenced data.
Changed accelerator key for scatter plots to avoid conflict with that for performance measures.
Fixed an occasional problem with y-axis range on logarithmic scree plots.
Changed y-axis label on unreferenced skill graphs to name of score.
Improved positioning of y-axis labels.
Improved default definitions of tick mark intervals.
Minor improvements in efficiency of constructing y-axes.
Resolved occasional problems with bar graphs extending beyond the x-axis.
Red, green, and blue graph lines darkened.
Implemented some preliminary steps to permit future user-setting of contour and y-axis ranges.
Supplied some missing INTRINSIC statements.
Updated help pages.


version 4.05

Removed the "no replacement" missing value option, which had been causing some confusion.
Correction made to calculation of forecast probabilities.
Fixed problem generating forecasts when number of forecasts has been increased.
Fixed problem saving some results when using unreferenced data.
Changed "X variables" prompts to "Explanatory (X) variables" prompts.
Changed "Y variables" prompts to "Response (Y) variables" prompts.
Updated help pages.


version 4.04

Minor improvements in efficiency in performing SVD, with accompanying reduction in size of executable.
Small reductions in memory requirements.


version 4.03

Implemented black and white graphics option.
Resolved some problems running analysis after cancelled new input file.
Supplied missing station/grid type when using project file.
Changed default JPEG filenames for forecast maps to include year.
Realigned bootstrap setting prompts.
Implemented LAPACK patches.
Minor improvements in efficiency in performing SVD.
Corrected some INTENT declarations, and reinstituted INTENT(INOUT) after compiler bug fix.


version 4.02

Changed format of forecast probabilities output file, and corrected incorrect output when data are gridded.
Corrected format of some error messages.
Removed variance-adjusted best-guess forecasts.
Increased console window size for screen resolutions of 1792 or greater.
Corrected occasional problems plotting forecast "maps" for unreferenced data.
Resolved occasional program hang when all data on bar graphs are negative.
Set correct upper limit to climatological period.
Deleted some redundant, and supplied some missing, USE variables.
Removed some redundant calculations and variables in forecast module.
Implemented analysis type variables for improved modulation.
Minor changes to dataset structure definitions.
Prompts for missing value settings moved to analysis module.
Deleted forecast probabilities derived type to improve compatibility with EPT.
Minor improvements in efficiency in setting forecast calculation flag when resetting climatological period.
Minor improvements in efficiency in performing SVD.


version 4.01

Implemented option to draw high-resolution boarders and coastlines.
Implemented option to set graphic titles.
Implemented data types to allow user-defined axis range at a later version.
Corrected occasional problems with year limits on forecast graphs.
Updated some window titles.
Changed some menu item shortcuts to avoid conflicts.
Fixed fatal error because of unset climatology when running PCR.
Fixed occasional problems with data output after an earlier output cancellation.
Increased console window size for screen resolutions of 1600 or greater.
Bootstrap confidence intervals activated.
Graphics frozen on old results windows.
Eliminated occasional vertical lines on scatter plots.
Scree plot customise options moved to right mouse click, permitting immediate update.
Improved precision of values on vertical labelbars.
Updated help pages for new features, plus general editing.
New derived type implemented for graphics images, borders, and margins. 


version 3.30

Added option to reset climatological period.
Threshold values included on forecast series window.
Improved y-axis scaling.
Added option to plot scree plots on log-linear axes.
Added broken-stick to scree plots.
Fixed problem updating unreferenced variable name on some windows.
Fixed problem viewing forecast maps when number of forecasts is more than one and lag is more than zero.
Fixed problems saving data in station format.
Bootstrap option reactivated (although confidence intervals are not shown yet).
Updated help pages to include descriptions of new options.
Changed default JPEG quality to maximum value.
Some missing axis labels supplied.
Removed vertical 5-marker lines when number of x-axis points is only 5.
Removed some redundant USE statements.
Further generalisation of graphics routines.
Modularisation of output error routines.
Moved function to obtain data precision to numbers module.


version 3.29

Corrected occasional fatal error producing contingency tables.
Minor improvements in efficiency in routines for checking settings.
Replaced legacy DBLE calls with REAL, KIND=dp.
Removed redundant INTERFACE blocks.


version 3.28

Optional vertical year lines activated on forecast graphs.
Further modularisation to improve compatibility with EPT.
Minor improvements in efficiency of graphics routines.
Minor improvements in efficiency of initialisation of some windows.
Supplied some missing intrinsic function statements.
Minor revisions made to error, warning, and advisory notes.
Removed some redundant IMPLICIT statements.
Renamed some tables routines.


version 3.27

Fixed fatal problem with threshold calculation from version 3.26.


version 3.26

Implemented some minor improvements in efficiency of graph drawing.
Further modularisation to improve compatibility with EPT.


version 3.25

Fixed occasional problem setting number of forecasts at first attempt.
Supplied some missing, and removed some unused, USE declarations.
Removed some redundant INTRINSIC statements.


version 3.24

Resolved problem accepting default forecast file.
Resolved problem with file attributes after unsuccessful opening of forecast file.
Graphics options grouped in Customise menu.
Improved some error messages for when input files cannot be opened.
Year(s) keyword accepted in place of Name in unreferenced data files.
Series name for unreferenced files indicated on relevant validation, contingency table, and forecast windows.
Minor improvements in efficiency of domains comparison function.
Redesigned tables module for greater compatibility with similar modules.
Supplied some missing, and removed some unused, INTRINSIC declarations.


version 3.23

Correct date and month output when both datasets are gridded.
Additional checks implemented for gridded data.
X input file provided as default forecast file.
Fixed occasional memory problems resulting from unsuccessful opening of forecast file.
Implemented attempt to restore previous forecast file after unsuccessful opening of new forecast file.
Forecast results retained after forecast window closed.
Year of target data indicated for forecasts with non-zero lag.
Fixed occasional problems printing longitudes.
Fixed occasional problems with longitudes exceeding 360 in output files.
Fixed problem initializing default first year of interest.
Warning message issued if lag is greater than 1.


version 3.22

Cross supplied at last point on graphs.
Input day and month for gridded data printed in output files.
Adjustments made to some USE statements.


version 3.21

Fixed problem drawing maps with a range of less than 1 degree.
Fixed problem drawing maps when only one longitude is selected.
Fixed occasional problems when optimizing number of canonical modes.
Removed some redundant and supplied some missing USE arguments.


version 3.20

Implemented fix for viewing forecast maps at low screen resolution.
Fixed problem reading unreferenced forecast file.


version 3.19

Forecast menu item disabled if newly opened project does not have forecast file set.
Supplied missing CCA column heading for number of modes optimisation.


version 3.18

New menu item added to provide confidence limits and significance tests using resampling procedures.
New menu item added to adjust resampling settings.
New property sheet added to define default resampling settings.
CPT.ini file extended to include resampling settings.
Fixed problem saving forecast maps as JPEG files.
Reconfigured interface blocks for compatibility with source code version of CPT.
Analysis initialisation routines changed to functions.
Some modules renamed.


version 3.17

Minor changes to some window titles.
Fixed some problems accessing the help pages.
Removed some redundant USE, PUBLIC, and INTRINSIC statements.
Help pages updated for changes to file formats implemented at version 3.15.


version 3.16

Implemented second check on number of EOF modes to compare with number of available variables.
Second check fixes occasional program crash.


version 3.15

Fixed problem opening input files with no file extension.
Station file format changed to require STATION, LATITUDE, and LONGITUDE keywords.
Unreferenced file format changed to require NAME keyword, and to require variable names.
Excel files saved as Text (Tab delimited) can be read as station and unreferenced datasets.


version 3.14

Fixed occasional problem saving skill scores for gridded Y datasets.


version 3.13

Corrected labeling of X homogeneous map series output file prompt.
Supplied missing portion of save prompt for PCR project files.
Fixed problem trapping memory allocation errors when making forecast.


version 3.12

Corrected variance-adjusted forecast values.
Disabled cross-validation window length of 0.
Set default first year of interest in forecast file to maximum of first year available, and first year of interest of X.
Prompts modified for saving changed project file settings.
Error message implemented for varying months in gridded datasets.
Number of years read successfully is now indicated when there is an error reading input data.
Training period is indicated in results window when constructing the model.
Window titles changed to indicate Input and Results Windows.
Minor editorial modifications to help pages.


version 3.11

Fixed occasional program crash when viewing validation results.


version 3.10

Fixed problem displaying EOF loadings of unreferenced data.
Largest absolute EOF loadings forced to be positive.
Initial focus provided to default file structure to prevent incorrect selection after enter.
Simplified assignment of file unit numbers.


version 3.09

Results window closed after errors.
Minor improvements to smoothness of advance of progress meter.
Windows closed properly after errors.
Modified nearest neighbour missing value estimation routine so as not to use estimated values when identifying nearest neighbour.
Fixed occasional program crash when optimizing CCA setting
Simplified handling of insufficient memory when making forecasts.
Simplified use of property sheet handles.
Missing INTENT declarations supplied.


version 3.08

New goodness index implemented (see help pages for details.
Added option to save input data (in case estimated missing values are required).
Results window opened immediately to show progress in reading data, and to allow earlier termination.
Fixed problem calculating number of gridpoints in south-north gridded data.
Fixed problems in forecasting with south-north gridded data.
Fixed some problems saving gridded results.
Fixed problem setting missing value estimation method for Y data.
Minor modification made to tercile definition function to handle very small sample sizes.
Slight improvements in efficiency of drawing forecast graph.
Minor modifications to handling termination of analyses given insufficient memory.
Minor changes in format of some console messages.
Corrected incorrect labeling of X eigenvalues output file prompt.
Fixed problem calculating EOFs of cross-products matrix.
Fixed program crash with PCR when variance of cross-validation sub-sample is zero.
Simplified calling of data output routines.
Memory allocation modularised, and safer deallocation implemented.
Data output routines incorporated into data_io module.
Some variables in arrays module moved to analysis module.
Removal of some redundant IMPLICIT statements.
Scree plot routines modularized.
Help files updated.


version 3.07

Minor revisions made to tercile definition function.
Simplified handling of some memory allocation problem warnings.


version 3.06

Fixed problem drawing skill maps for gridded Y data.
Fixed overlay of CCA scores.
Added option to view and save retroactive residuals and scatter plots.
Added additional accelerator keys to results window menu items.
Scatter Plots menu item moved from Graphics to Validation~Cross-validated.
Graphics menu item renamed depending on analysis method.
Other Tools sub-menu items renamed.
Fixed occasional problems inheriting domains.
Fixed occasional problems setting domain limits with station data.
Fixed occasional problems reading south-north oriented gridded data sets.
Fixed problem drawing maps of gridded data that is not global and region is split. 
Eliminated preference for an increasing or decreasing latitude ordering.
New checks and error messages implemented for domain settings.
Approximate geographical limits of data indicated on domain selection window.
No replacement of missing values option included.
New meaning for 0% maximum missing values: stations/grids with any missing values are excluded.
Forced selection of one missing value replacement option.
Vertical lines on graphs set as default.
Hourglass cursor indicated while JPEG files are saving.
New warning issued if more than one month/season per year is suspected in input files.
New warning issued if project file settings are changed and an attempt is made to close the file.
Results window generation modularized.
Further modularisation of map drawing routines.
Help pages converted to full html, and are opened in the default browser.
Help pages updated for new features.
CPT enabled when Help Pages are open.


version 3.05

Prevented program from crashing when there is a problem reading in forecast data.
Fixed problems arising on second viewing of forecast results.
Fixed an occasional program crash and other problems when stations are outside of domain.
Fixed failure to allow line-breaks in station input files.
Slight changes to some error messages on reading input files.
Forced selection of one input data structure.
Accelerator keys added for data structure selection.
Some improvements in efficiency of calculation of skill scores for skill maps.
Corrected mapping of ROC areas for the above-normal category.
Fixed occasional problems of maps being drawn horizontally striped.
Fixed problem of missing map shading where input longitudes wrap around.
Fixed tercile indicators on graphs when data is rescaled.
Fixed inaccuracies in ROC area calculations and graphs.
Improved formatting of scaling label on axes.
Improved visibility of crosses on station maps.
Added option to include crosses on graphs.
Added option to include vertical lines on graphs.
Added regression line to scatter plot.
Opening of project files modularized.
Opening of input files modularized.
Graphics drawing modularized.
Calculation of validation statistics modularized.
Contingency table calculations modularized.
Most support routines included in modules.
Minor enhancements in efficiency of reading station data.
Simplified memory allocation for reading data.
Some redundant variables removed.
Changed assumed-sized arrays to assumed-shaped arrays, and provided explicit interfaces for most routines.
Help pages updated for new features.


version 3.04

Added option to replace missing values with median.
Added option to replace missing values by regression using nearest neighbour.
Updated help pages to describe new missing value options.
Fixed occasional failure to replace missing values in forecast data.
Fixed input screen formatting problem for some screen resolutions when switching analysis methods after a calculation. 
Disabled input screen reactivation after opening output file windows.
Supplied some missing use statements in interface blocks.
Some renaming of variables.


version 3.03

EOF and CCA loadings of unreferenced data now plotted as correlations on bar charts.
Fixed problem closing CPT when project file is unsuccessfully opened from Introductory window.
Fixed problem displaying CCA and PCR project files when project file is unsuccessfully opened from Introductory window.
Fixed incorrect indication of full training period when using retroactive option with PCR.
Fixed some problems with multiple file extensions for output files.
Output file extensions for unformatted files changed to .dat.
Output file description added to derived type, which changes some window text in places.
General improvements in output formats.
Implemented option to save real-time forecasts.
Help pages updated to explain how to save real-time forecasts.
Streamlined output file routines, and reorganized iofiles and data_io modules.
Graphics output file name can now be set, and warning is issued if file exists.
Previous directory is remembered when using browse buttons.
Help pages updated to explain output file extensions, and for JPEG output.
Save Y eigenvalues scree plot removed for PCR.
Implemented rescaling of data for plots when values are either large or small.
Made minor adjustments to algorithm for identifying selected skill measure.
Simplified save forecast image menu prompt.
Improved save skill map data dialogue window.
Adjusted default record length of skill scores output file.
Safer memory deallocation implemented.
Realigned longitudes array implemented to simplify all longitude references for gridded data.
Some redundant checks removed.
Some internal renaming of arrays.
Some changes to window handles and removal of redundant control variables.
Some corrections made to subroutine argument intents.
Changed DOUBLE PRECISION to REAL with declared KIND(1.0d0).
Some redundant INTRINSIC declarations deleted.
Supplied missing USE statements in a few INTERFACE blocks.


version 3.02

Options for missing values included.
Help pages updated for missing value option.
Option to set default domain included.
Precision of values on labelbar made variable.
Some causes of uneven spacing of horizontal colour-bar labels and of longitude labels fixed.
Occasional problem of overlapping latitude labels fixed.
EOF/CCA mode numbers added to loadings and temporal scores graphs.
Canonical correlation added to CCA modes graphics window.
Colour scales on hit score maps changed.
Internal changes made to some contour-setting for graphics.
Prompt for domain automatically issued after specifying number of gridpoints or stations.
Output file prompts split into property sheets.
Problem with progress bar when no output files are specified fixed.
Format of output of cross-validated and retroactive predictions modified.
New CPT.ini file required.
Check included and advisory issued for old CPT.ini files.
Project File formats updated to include missing value information.
Check included and advisory issued for old Project Files.
Problem opening project file with unset input files fixed.
Radio button prompt introduced for data file structure.
Fixed problem identifying first year of data in forecast file for station data.
Fixed some problems caused by external files being left open after being read unsuccessfully.
Input file selection routines modularized.
Old input files retained if new input file selection is cancelled.
Default first year of interest retained when input file is selected.
Console window caption removed.
Confirmation prompts added to forecast file window.
Close menu item removed from forecast file window.
Help menu item added to output files window.
Domain and grid derived-types introduced to simplify programming.
Data structure flag added to input file derived type.
Redundant first year of data in file default setting prompts removed.
Redundant window handle settings removed.
Slight adjustments made to contingency table formats.
Minimum disk space requirement details in Help Pages updated.
Other minor revisions to Help Pages.


version 3.01

Forecast maps and bar charts implemented.
Skill maps and bar charts can be saved.
Addition of option for station dataset as input data structure.
Skill maps drawn for station datasets.
"Number of gridpoints" and "Number of series" prompts changed dynamically to reflect data structure.
"Series" prompts changed to reflect data structure.
Automatic prompt for number of series when ungridded format is selected replaces Input Screen prompt.
Minor performance enhancements in construction and update of Input Screen.
Other minor performance enhancements.
Some occasional memory allocation problems when opening project files fixed.
Some additional checks for correct input file formats implemented.
Items on Input Screen reorganized.
Some problems with cursor when warning and error messages issued resolved.
Fixed problem with cursor when no output files are specified.
Fixed problem with indicating latitudes between 0 and 10S.
Fixed problem with formatting of some windows at low screen resolutions.
Help pages updated for new features.
Note on missing values added to the Input Datasets Help Page.
Other minor editorial changes made to Help Pages.


version 2.32

Warning message issued if problem with reading country boundaries rather than program crashing.
Error message issued if problem opening or reading CPT.ini.


version 2.31

Grid references shown for gridded Y data on verification, contingency table, and scatter plot screens.
Column headers added to formatted eigenvalues output files.
Formatted output of EOF loadings changed for gridded data, with latitudes and longitudes included in output.
Output routines generalized.
Some editorial changes made to Help Files.


version 2.30

Fixed problem with map shading when data domain is sub-global.
Skill maps enlarged.
Fixed problem with Y data settings in Project Files.
Occasional problems in setting northern domain limit for sub-global grids fixed.
Some problems with hourglass cursor after calculations are aborted fixed.
Small changes to the way aborted calculations are handled.
Help page on Project Files added.
Some dead help page links fixed.


version 2.29

Option to open project file from title screen added.
Hourglass cursor added for when program is busy.
Skill maps and histograms implemented.
Verification menu items renamed to Validation, and sub-menus modified to include the new maps.
Window title for domain selection clarified.
Other changes to some window titles.
Latitude-longitude lines reset to dotted format.
Corrections made to western longitude labels.
Corrections made to map shading when map domain exceeds data domain.
Colour scale centred correctly when number of contours is less than maximum.
Scaling on colour-bar corrected and indicated.
Other small adjustments made to colour-bar.
Small crosses added to scree plots to indicate data points.
Input file names cancelled if unsuccessfully read.
Action menu item disabled when input file is closed.
Updates made to Help-About.
Comments on JPEG quality included in the Help pages.
Acknowledgements added to the Help pages.
Changes made to Help pages because of new features.
Changes made to the mapping subroutine to allow for greater flexibility in calling.


version 2.28

Coordinate labels added to maps.
Colour bar added to maps.
Map titles repositioned on wide maps.
All EOF and CCA loadings on maps are now shown as correlations with the corresponding time scores.
Line labels added to ROC diagrams.
Added ability to save graphics as JPEG files using right mouse button.
CPT.INI modified to store default output directory for JPEG files.
Gridded input files can be ordered north-south or south-north.
Corresponding changes made to help pages.
Help page structure map updated.
Advisory message added for successful saving of project file.


version 2.27

Correction made for setting default number of Y series.
Comment on bimodal forecast probabilities added to help pages.
Seamless adjustments to some Fortran IMPLICIT statements and INTERFACE blocks.


version 2.26

Improved data input error checking.
Improved memory management.
Forced reset of forecast file when X input file is re-specified.
Errors in categorical verification measures, including ROC graphs, fixed.
Fixed errors and occasional memory violations when typing in series number.


version 2.25

Fixed problems with latitudes for gridded files when data runs to next line.


version 2.24

Problems opening gridded y files when using an old project file fixed.
Occasional premature completion of CCA progress meter fixed.
Occasional stalling of progress meter fixed.
Occasional errors with missing grids and series fixed.
Correction made to CPT.INI to fix problems accessing PROJECTS subdirectory.
Error trap included for non-consecutive years in gridded input files.
